WGS and RNAseq data processing
================

This manual describes all WGS and RNAseq data processing approaches used
to characterize samples with APOBEC mutagenesis.

Refer to directory **scRNAseq** for the manual of scRNAseq data
processing approaches within this project.

# WGS data analyses

WGS data analyses are conducted to screen all BCP-ALL samples for the presence of signatures SBS2 and SBS13    
and to explore mutational patterns within *ETV6::RUNX1*-positive samples.   

**NOTE:** custom R functions are sourced from script
`createdFunctions_HM-ALL.R` for VCF processing.

### Script variantFilteringAndMutSignatureAnalysis_WGScohort.R

Used to screen the complete BCP-ALL cohort for the presence of signatures SBS2 and SBS13. VCFs, generated by    
somatic variant calling of the WGS data with Mutect2, are required as input.   

Variants are filtered on read depth, variant allele frequency, population frequency and are required to be outside    
of centromeric regions. A mutation matrix is constructed, which is refitted to diagnosis-related COSMIC signatures.    
Absolute and relative contributions, including bootstrap values, are calculated and samples with SBS2 and/or SBS13      
associated mutations are visualized.

### Script variantFilteringAndMutSignatureAnalysis_APOBEC.R

Used to analyze SBS2 and SBS13 mutational patterns in *ETV6::RUNX1*-positive BCP-ALL. VCFs, generated by    
somatic variant calling of the WGS data with Mutect2, are required as input.    

Variants are filtered on read depth, variant allele frequency, population frequency and are required to be outside     
of centromeric regions. A mutation matrix is constructed, which is refitted to diagnosis-related COSMIC signatures.    
Absolute and relative contributions, including bootstrap values, are calculated and visualized. The code consists     
of additional analyses to also explore subclonal and pentanucleotide mutational patterns.    

Furthermore, comparisons of APOBEC mutagenesis in WGS data to expression patterns in RNAseq data are performed.     
In specific, correlation analyses are performed to compare the number of SBS2 and SBS13 mutations vs the    
expression of *APOBEC3A* and *APOBEC3B* and the percentage of RNA editing in *DDOST* in each sample. Refer to    
chapter **RNAseq data analyses** to prepare input files for these comparisons.   

### Script generateAnnotateCNVsegmentsJobs.sh

Used to generate SLURM job files to annotate the segment files created by CNV-calling with GATK. This script    
annotates which genes are located within each CNV and which alteration type is detected (LOSS, GAIN, LOH, …).    
Script `annotateSCNVoutput.R` is sourced to perform the annotation.

### Script OncoplotGenerator_APOBEC.R

Used to analyze mutational patterns in *ETV6::RUNX1*-positive samples. VCFs, generated by somatic variant     
calling with Mutect2, and annotated CNV files, generated from script `generateAnnotateCNVsegmentsJobs.sh`,    
are required as input.   

Variants are filtered on read depth, variant allele frequency, population frequency and are required to be outside     
of centromeric regions. CNVs are filtered for gene losses.   

An oncoplot is generated based on the gene list described by Brady *et al.* (2022), refer to:   
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01159-z>.

# RNAseq data analyses

RNAseq data analyses are conducted to explore expression differences between *ETV6::RUNX1*-samples with and    
without APOBEC-mutagenesis, with a specific focus on *APOBEC3A* and *APOBEC3B*. Additionally, the percentage    
of RNA editing in *DDOST* is determined in all BCP-ALL samples.

### Script DE-analysis_APOBEC.R

Used for differential expression (DE) analysis and enrichment analyses between *ETV6::RUNX1*-positive samples    
with and without APOBEC-mutagenesis. Additionally, the expression patterns of the complete BCP-ALL cohort are     
analysed. Count files produced by Rsubread are required as input, as well as the subtype annotations of all    
samples and the SBS2 and SBS13 status in *ETV6::RUNX1*-positive samples.   

The approach of Li *et al.* (2025) is followed to explore additional expression differences between *ETV6::RUNX1*-    
positive samples with and without APOBEC-mutagenesis, refer to: <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56229-7>.

### Script generateBamReadcountJobs.sh

Used to generate SLURM jobs to conduct variant calling with bam-readcount. This script is used to determine the     
percentage of RNA editing in the *DDOST* gene at C558U. Requires the CRAM file of each RNAseq sample as input.

### Script DDOST_hotspot_editing_APOBEC.R

Used to determine and visualize the percentage of RNA editing in *DDOST*. Requires the merged bam-readcount     
outputs of all BCP-ALL samples with subtype annotations, as generated by script `generateBamReadcountJobs.sh`.  
