Manual to conduct scRNAseq analysis
================

This manual describes all steps for scRNAseq analysis.

**NOTE:** Some analyses can be omitted if you already know which barcodes belong to which patient. You can then start    
with step 1 and 2 and proceed from step 5.   

Input files required for this analysis, which are provided by the sc-facility or should be generated by yourself:

1.  **Filtered feature matrix per library,** extension `filtered_feature_bc_matrix.h5`. These matrices are constructed from    
    FASTQ files using the CellRanger pipeline. Full documentation and instructions can be found here:     
    <https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/cell-ranger/latest>

2.  **Cluster assignments per library**, extension `clusters.tsv`. These tab-separated files are constructed from BAM files,    
    which are outputted by CellRanger, using the SoupOrCell pipeline. Full documentation and instructions can be found    
    here: <https://github.com/wheaton5/souporcell>

3.  **Cluster genotypes per library**, extension `cluster_genotypes.vcf`. VCF with the genotype per barcode. Also outputted    
    by SoupOrCell (see above).   

## Step 1: Combine input files per library

To start the scRNAseq analysis, you should first combine all count files and cluster assignments per library.

#### Script scRNAseq_combineFilteredFeatureMatrices.R

Combine the count files per library (extension `filtered_feature_bc_matrix.h5`).

#### Script scRNAseq_combineClusterFiles.R

Combine the cluster assignment files per library (extension `clusters.tsv`).

## Step 2: Construct Seurat object of scRNAseq libraries

The combined count matrix (generated in step 1) is used as input for the Autoana pipeline to construct a Seurat object    
for scRNAseq analysis.   

Full documentation and instructions can be found here: <https://bitbucket.org/princessmaximacenter/autoana/src/master/>

#### Script APOBEC-scRNAseq_preprocessDataSetWithAutoana.Rmd

Construct a Seurat object from the combined count matrix with additional QC steps.

**NOTE:** the resulting .RDS file is saved as .qs file for to decrease storage requirements. Load `.RDS` file in R    
and resave with `qs::qsave(srat, “APOBEC-final.qs”)`.

## Step 3: Determine which barcodes belong to which patient

To determine which barcodes belong to which patient, you require:

1.  The VCF of each scRNAseq library describing the cluster genotypes (extension `cluster_genotypes.vcf`)

2.  The VCF of each sample in your scRNAseq data set. This VCF is generated by the genomicscore data processing    
    pipeline. It can also be constructed from the germline WGS data of each patient using GATK variant calling.    
      
    It is recommended, but not required, to subset this VCF for exome regions and to remove variants that are    
    also found in other samples within this library.   
    
    
    **NOTE**: script `filterVcfForSpecificEntries.R` can be used to compare all VCFs from samples within one    
    library to each other and to subset each VCF for entries uniquely found in that sample     

#### Script generateVCFevalJobs.sh

Uses VCF-eval to determine which patient genotype matches to which library cluster genotype. This script should be    
run separately for each scRNAseq library. Write the resulting patient-cluster assignments to an Excel file.

## Step 4: Remove cell-line specific barcodes from library LX343

Library LX343 consists of data of four patients and 1 cell line (NALM-6). These cell-line specific barcodes add noise     
and need to be removed. The resulting barcodes should then be reassigned to each patient with SoupOrcell, using k=4    
instead of k=5, to accurately assign each barcode to each patient.

#### Script APOBEC-scRNAseq_definePatientCells_LX343.R

Uses the cluster assignments of library LX343 from step 3 and checks within the Seurat object of library LX343    
which barcodes are patient-specific. The cell-line specific barcodes are immediately removed from the combined    
Seurat object of all libraries (generated in step 2).

#### Script generateSouporcellJobs.sh

The previous script generated a new clusters.tsv file for library LX343. Use this as the barcode file for cluster    
assignment with Souporcell (k=4).

#### Script generateVCFevalJobs.sh

The previous script generated a VCF file for library LX343 (`cluster_genotypes.vcf`). Use this file as input for    
this script to determine the corresponding genotype of each barcode. Update the meta data in the Excel file    
that you created in step 3 with the new cluster assignments.

#### Script scRNAseq_combineClusterFiles.R

Combine the new k=4 clusters.tsv file for library LX343 that SoupOrCell created with the clusters.tsv files of    
the other scRNAseq libraries.

## Step 5: scRNAseq analysis

Once you reached this step, you have constructed all input files for the analysis of the complete scRNAseq cohort.

#### Use script APOBEC-scRNAseq-analysis.R for all downstream analyses.

**NOTE:**

- If you needed to determine patient barcodes and have followed all
  steps in this manual:  
  Keyword parameters:

> SEURAT_OBJECT: the Seurat object that is filtered for patient
> barcodes  
> MERGED_CLUSTERS: the combined cluster files of all libraries, where
> cluster file LX343 was subsetted for patient barcodes  
> CLUSTER_META_DATA: Excel file describing which library cluster belongs
> to which patient

- If you already knew which barcodes belong to which patient and you did
  not have to follow step 3 and 4:  
  Keyword parameters:

> SEURAT_OBJECT: the Seurat object that is constructed from the combined
> count matrices of each library (step 2)  
> MERGED_CLUSTERS: the combined cluster files of all libraries (step
> 1)  
> CLUSTER_META_DATA: the file listing which barcode belongs to which
> patient
>
> You should add a few lines of code to subset your Seurat object and merged clusters for the barcodes that are present    
> in CLUSTER_META_DATA. You can skip the lines in the R script where each barcode is assigned to a patient (lines 45-85)     
> but you do need to add the sample IDs as a new column in your Seurat object describing which barcode belongs to which    
> patient (column name: sample_assignment). Also add a meta data column listing the SBS2/13 status of each patient    
> (column name: apobec_status).

## Optional analysis:

#### Script determineBarcodesWithALTreadsAtTargetLocation.py

Determines which barcodes contain a mutation at a specific target location. Can for instance be used to    
assess which barcodes in the complete scRNAseq data set contain alternative reads in the *DDOST* gene at    
the hotspot location.
